The Tiananmen Square protests or the Tiananmen Square Incident, commonly known as the June Fourth Incident (Chinese: 六四事件; pinyin: liùsì shìjiàn, 
literally the six-four incident) in mainland China, were student-led demonstrations held in Tiananmen Square in Beijing during 1989.
The popular national movement inspired by the Beijing protests is sometimes called the '89 Democracy Movement (Chinese: 八九民运; pinyin: Bājiǔ mínyùn). 
The protests started on April 15 and were forcibly suppressed on June 4 when the government declared martial law and sent the People's Liberation Army 
to occupy central parts of Beijing.
In what became known as the Tiananmen Square Massacre (Chinese: 天安门大屠杀; pinyin: Tiān'ānmén dà túshā), 
troops armed with assault rifles and accompanied by tanks fired at the demonstrators and those trying to block the military's advance into Tiananmen Square. 
Estimates of the death toll vary from several hundred to several thousand, with thousands more wounded.
The protests were set off by the death of pro-reform Communist general secretary Hu Yaobang in April 1989 amid the backdrop of 
rapid economic development and social changes in post-Mao China, reflecting anxieties about the country's future in the popular 
consciousness and among the political elite. The reforms of the 1980s had led to a nascent market economy that benefited some p
eople but seriously disadvantaged others, and the one-party political system also faced a challenge of legitimacy. Common grievances at
the time included inflation, corruption, limited preparedness of graduates for the new economy,[8] and restrictions on political participation.
Although they were highly disorganized and their goals varied, the students called for greater accountability, constitutional due process, 
democracy, freedom of the press, and freedom of speech. At the height of the protests, about one million people assembled in the Square
As the protests developed, the authorities responded with both conciliatory and hardline tactics, exposing deep divisions within the party leadership. 
By May, a student-led hunger strike galvanized support for the demonstrators around the country, and the protests spread to some 400 cities. 
Ultimately, Deng Xiaoping and other Chinese Communist Party elders believed the protests to be a political threat and resolved to use force. 
The State Council declared martial law on May 20 and mobilized as many as 300,000 troops to Beijing.
The troops advanced into central parts of Beijing on the city's major thoroughfares in the early morning hours of June 4, 
killing both demonstrators and bystanders in the process.
The international community, human rights organizations, and political analysts condemned the Chinese government for the massacre.
Western countries imposed arms embargoes on China.The Chinese government made widespread arrests of protesters and their supporters,
suppressed other protests around China, expelled foreign journalists, strictly controlled coverage of the events in the domestic press, 
strengthened the police and internal security forces, and demoted or purged officials it deemed sympathetic to the protests. 
More broadly, the suppression ended the political reforms since 1986 and halted the policies of liberalization in the 1980s, 
which were only resumed partly after Deng Xiaoping's Southern Tour in 1992. It notably failed to spark major political reforms as opposed to Eastern Bloc 
protests during the Revolutions of 1989.[citation needed] Considered a watershed event, the protests set the limits on political expression 
in China up to the present day. Its memory is widely associated with questioning the legitimacy of Communist Party rule and remains one of the most
sensitive and most widely censored topics in China
Events named by date in Chinese are conventionally named by the number of the month and the date, followed by the type of event. 
Thus, the common Chinese name for the crackdown is "June Fourth Incident" (Chinese: 六四事件; pinyin: liùsì shìjiàn). 
The nomenclature is consistent with the customary names of the other two great protests that occurred in Tiananmen Square: the May Fourth Movement of 
1919 and the April Fifth Movement of 1976. June Fourth refers to the day on which the People's Liberation Army cleared Tiananmen Square of protesters, 
although actual operations began on the evening of June 3. Names such as June Fourth Movement (六四运动; liù-sì yùndòng) and '89 Democracy Movement (八九民运; bā-jiǔ mínyùn) 
are used to describe the event in its entirety.
The Chinese Communist Party has used numerous names for the event since 1989, gradually reducing the intensity of terminology 
applied.[24] As the events unfolded, it was labelled a "counterrevolutionary riot," which was later changed to simply "riot," followed by "political storm". 
Finally the leadership settled on the more neutral phrase "political turmoil between the Spring and Summer of 1989," which it uses to this day.
Outside mainland China, and among circles critical of the crackdown within mainland China, it is commonly referred to in Chinese as 
"June Fourth Massacre" (六四屠殺; liù-sì túshā) and "June Fourth Crackdown" (六四鎮壓; liù-sì zhènyā). To bypass internet censorship in China, 
which uniformly considers all the above-mentioned names too "sensitive" for search engines and public forums, 
alternative names have sprung up to describe the events on the Internet, such as May 35th, VIIV (Roman numerals for 6 and 4), Eight Squared (i.e. 82=64) 
and 8964 (i.e. yymd).
In English, the terms "Tiananmen Square Massacre", "Tiananmen Square Protests", and "Tiananmen Square Crackdown"
are often used to describe the series of events. However, much of the violence in Beijing did not actually happen in Tiananmen, 
but outside the square along a stretch of Chang'an Avenue only a few miles long, and especially near the Muxidi area. The term also gives a misleading impression 
that demonstrations only happened in Beijing, when in fact they occurred in many cities throughout China.
The Cultural Revolution ended with chairman Mao Zedong's death in 1976 and the arrest of the Gang of Four. 
The movement, spearheaded by Mao, caused severe damage to the country's originally diverse economic and social fabric. 
The country was mired in poverty as economic production slowed or came to a halt.[citation needed] Political ideology was
paramount in the lives of ordinary people as well as the inner workings of the Communist Party itself.
In September 1977, Deng Xiaoping proposed the idea of "Boluan Fanzheng" to correct the mistakes of the Cultural Revolution. 
At the Third Plenum of the 11th Central Committee in December 1978, Deng emerged as China's de facto leader. 
He launched a comprehensive program to reform the Chinese economy (Reforms and Opening-up). Within several years, 
the country's focus on ideological purity was replaced by a full-on drive to achieve material prosperity.
To run his reform agenda, Deng promoted his allies to top government and party posts. Hu Yaobang became General 
Secretary of the Communist Party in 1982, while Zhao Ziyang was named Premier, the head of government, in September 1980.
The reforms aimed to decrease the role of the state in the economy and gradually introduced private forms of 
production into agriculture and industry. By 1981, roughly 73% of rural farms had been de-collectivized and 80% of state 
owned enterprises were permitted to retain their profits. Within a few years, production increased and poverty was substantially reduced.[citation needed]
While the reforms were generally well received by the public, concerns grew over a series of social problems which the changes brought about, 
including corruption and nepotism by elite party bureaucrats.[29] The state-mandated pricing system, in place since the 1950s, 
had long kept prices stable at low levels. The initial reforms created a two-tier system where some prices were fixed while
others were allowed to fluctuate. In a market with chronic shortages, this allowed people with powerful connections to buy goods at 
low prices and sell at market prices. Party bureaucrats suddenly found themselves in charge of a burgeoning state regime over economic management 
and enormous incentives for arbitrage.Discontent over corruption reached a fever pitch with the public, and many, particularly those in 
the intellectual community, began to believe that only democratic reform and rule of law could act as a panacea for the country's ills.
Following the 1988 Beidaihe meeting, the party leadership under Deng agreed to implement a transition to a market-based pricing system.
News of the relaxation of price controls triggered waves of cash withdrawals, buying and hoarding all over China.The government panicked and 
rescinded the price reforms in less than two weeks, but its impact was pronounced for much longer. Inflation soared; official indices reported 
that the Consumer Price Index increased by 30% in Beijing between 1987 and 1988, leading to panic among salaried workers that they could no longer 
afford staple goods.[33] Moreover, in the new market economy, unprofitable state-owned enterprises were pressured to cut costs. This threatened a vast 
proportion of the population which relied on the "iron rice bowl," i.e. a host of social benefits such as job security, medical care and subsidized housing.
Social disenfranchisement and legitimacy crisis
Reformist leaders envisioned in 1978 that intellectuals would play a leading role in guiding the country through reforms,but this did not happen as planned.
Despite the opening of new universities and increased enrollment,[35] the state-directed education system did not produce enough graduates to meet increased
market demand in the areas of agriculture, light industry, services, and foreign investment.The job market was especially limited for students specializing in 
social sciences and the humanities.[35] Moreover, private companies no longer needed to accept students assigned to them by the state, and many high-paying jobs 
were offered on the basis of nepotism and favoritism.[37] Gaining a good state-assigned placement meant navigating a highly inefficient bureaucracy that 
gave power to officials who had little expertise in their area of jurisdiction.[33] Facing a dismal job market and limited chances of going abroad, intellectuals 
and students had a greater vested interest in political issues. Small study groups, such as the "Democracy Salon" and the "Lawn Salon" (Cǎodì Shālóng), 
began appearing on Beijing university campuses.[38] These organizations motivated the students to get involved politically.
At the same time, the party's nominally socialist ideology faced a legitimacy crisis as it gradually adopted capitalist practices.
Private enterprise gave rise to profiteers who took advantage of lax regulations, and who often flaunted their wealth in front of those who were less well off.
Popular discontent was brewing over unfair wealth distribution. Greed, not skill, appeared to be the most crucial factor of success. There was widespread public
disillusionment over the country's future. People wanted change, yet the power to define 'the correct path' continued to rest solely in the hands of 
the unelected government.[39]
The comprehensive and wide-ranging reforms created political differences over the pace of marketization and the control over the ideology that came with it, 
opening a deep chasm within the central leadership. The reformers ("the right," led by Hu Yaobang) favoured political liberalization and a plurality of ideas 
as a channel to voice popular discontent, and pressed for further reforms. The conservatives ("the left," led by Chen Yun) said that the reforms had gone too far, 
and advocated a return to greater state control to ensure social stability and to better align with the party's socialist ideology. However, both sides needed the 
backing of paramount leader Deng Xiaoping to carry out important policy decisions.[40]
1986 student demonstrations
Main article: 1986 Chinese Student Demonstrations
In mid-1986, astrophysics professor Fang Lizhi returned from a position at Princeton University and began a personal tour around universities 
in China speaking about liberty, human rights, and separation of powers. Fang was part of a wider undercurrent within the elite intellectual 
community that thought China's poverty and underdevelopment, and the disaster of the Cultural Revolution, were a direct result of the authoritarian political
system and the rigid command economy.[41] The view that larger political reform was the only answer to China's ongoing problems gained widespread appeal among
students as Fang's recorded speeches became widely circulated all over the country.In response, Deng Xiaoping warned that Fang was blindly worshipping Western 
lifestyles, capitalism, and multi-party systems, while undermining China's socialist ideology, traditional values, and the party's leadership.
Inspired by Fang and other 'people-power' movements around the world, in December 1986, student demonstrators staged protests against the slow pace of reform. 
The issues were wide-ranging, and included demands for economic liberalization, democracy, and rule of law.[43] While the protests were initially contained in Hefei,
where Fang lived, they quickly spread to Shanghai, Beijing and other major cities. This alarmed the central leadership, who accused the students of instigating Cultural 
Revolution-style turmoil.
General secretary Hu Yaobang was blamed for showing a 'soft' attitude and mishandling the protests, thus undermining social stability. 
He was denounced thoroughly by conservatives, and was forced to resign as general secretary on January 16, 1987. The party began the
"Anti-bourgeois liberalization campaign," taking aim at Hu, political liberalization and Western-inspired ideas in general.
The campaign stopped student protests and tightened the political environment, but Hu remained popular among intellectuals, students, and progressives in the party.

